---
title: "The 21st Century Dark Ages: On Historical Rhymes, Faith in Science & The Limits of Technicians - Part 4"
date: 2023-02-10
categories:
  - Article
tags:
  - science
  - philosophy
  - technology
---

# 3. OXYMORONS: MACHINE “LEARNING,” ARTIFICIAL “INTELLIGENCE” & “LIFE” AS DATA
Welcoming in the new millennium, the first moment of the year 2000 was in fact a non-event, but one which nonetheless posed gravely serious questions and concerns; the year 2000 problem, popularly known as Y2K.  

The Y2K bug was a potentially fatal error in the underlying code responsible for the operation of countless electrical and computing devices embedded throughout the infrastructure of industrialized nations. Transportation systems, public utilities, and nearly all modern industries—the life-sustaining umbilical chords of technological society—have been developed and largely automated thanks to these devices. As a clever solution to former limitations in on-device memory, instead of taking up 4 bits of memory by recording the year of dates as ‘1999,’ developers programmed devices with the less memory-intensive 2-bit format of ’99’.  

A previously unimaginable problem arose: what will the machines understand by ’00,’ the year 1900, 2000, or maybe even nothing at all? Most importantly, what will the consequences be? At the time the 2-bit solution to this pseudo-problem was developed, the Achilles heel in the system either never occurred to the technicians or, like so many other important things in life, it was simply overlooked for the sake of two wretchedly useful quantitative concepts: time and money. Ultimately, Y2K only caused a few minor problems and industrial society continued chugging along in the same direction in our march towards progress.  

In hindsight, fortunately we can brush off the Y2K scare as silly and irrelevant, a sort of modern-day prank in the likes of Orson Welles’ 1934 radio drama, The War of the Worlds, but many respected engineers and early programmers—the very people who built these technological systems—were deeply concerned about the potential for a chain reaction of system failures that could seriously cripple industrial society as we know it. Let’s hope and pray we can only be so lucky the next time we are faced with a similar conundrum.  

Moving forward into the early 2000s, we witnessed a great leap forward in networking and the dissemination of Internet technologies among the general public, thereby surpassing and converging all past media formats into a singular “information highway;” a human hive-mind of sorts. In 2020, over 50% of the global population—4 billion people—connected to the Internet hive-mind. Education, entertainment, news, public forums of all types, and even medical care are all increasingly recorded and delivered electronically, and social distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic has only provoked an exponential increase in this trend. It took approximately 85 years for land-line telephony to reach 60% of US households, while it took only 15 years for Internet penetration to reach the same level. As things stand, it is nearly guaranteed that humanity’s fate will be inextricably linked to the Internet, much like how electricity, plumbing, and printed media set the course of civilization up until now.  

Impressive advances in computing power, storage, and networking have led to a technical Renaissance in the uses and sheer amount of data available, and the now truly globalized economy has shifted from the age of industry to the digital information age as populations connect to the Internet. This change is evidenced when economists call data “the new oil,” meaning the new fuel and lubricant with which we will push progress along, while industrialists have coined the term “the fourth industrial revolution,” or Industry 4.0, as they prepare business roadmaps for ever-more projects and funding to bridge fields of engineering like robotics, computing, and automation in order to further boost industrial efficiency and control. The Davos Manifesto 2020 on “The Universal Purpose of a Company in the Fourth Industrial Revolution” defines one of the main objectives of enterprises to be that “it continuously expands the frontiers of knowledge, innovation and technology to improve people’s well-being”4. Does this affirmation make any sense if expanding knowledge, innovation, and technology do precisely the opposite and actually harm our well-being?  

Many of today’s most influential multinationals are technology players—Amazon, Microsoft, Apple, Alphabet aka Google, Facebook, and Alibaba—which operate business models largely focused on ephemeral software, algorithms, and data that can be leveraged for improved sales via ad-targeting, customer segmentation, and other computational guile to achieve higher returns on investments. Curiously enough, the religiosity of the techno-scientific clergy leading these endeavors is apparent in the preacher-like public image of prominent tech entrepreneurs, such as Bill Gates, Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos, who tend to appear publicly to discuss the meaning of life and future of humanity more than for specific products or strictly business-related purposes.  

It is interesting to look at the popular oxymorons of “artificial intelligence,” “machine learning,” “smart machines,” and the like, so many of which are all the hype in the press and among the corporate giants claiming that these technologies represent the most promising source of regeneration for civilization moving into the future. The frivolous misuse of words like “intelligence” and “learning” shows a deep, fundamental misunderstanding of their long-held meaning.  

With machine learning, is “teaching” a computer anything like teaching a human or any other biological being? Is it even possible for a machine to be “intelligent” if it is never able to fully experience biological human life which emanates from consciousness and awareness of our own mortality? With no means to understand qualitative elements of the human reality, how can a machine “learn” or be “intelligent” with regards to making someone happy or doing something well, both of which are metaphysical concepts with no quantitative basis?  

For instance, a robot or computer will fail miserably if presented with the task of cooking not just a meal but a good meal since artificial animism is unable to sense or feel the universal need of organic, biological life to both eat and expel waste to sustain itself. In order to perform the task, one must understand or share the subjective cultural and physiological dimensions of taste and smell which form every human’s dietary habits. Similarly, a machine encharged with making people happy would most likely study observable, quantifiable vital signs defined as indicators of happiness (e.g., dopamine) and might very well administer drugs—opiates, for example—to ensure that the subject’s key indicators match this programmed definition. Most would agree that being drugged with opiates is a far cry from what we would call happiness.  

Today’s nascent self-improving machines with capabilities known as “artificial intelligence” are typically trained by ingesting “big data” through techniques known as “data science”. Just as combinations of 0’s and 1’s which are seemingly unintelligible to the human eye form the underlying basis of all computing, big data consists vast sets of apparently unrelated data points being processed together in order to distill even more valuable data and previously unseen correlations. In their practical applications, machine learning is almost exclusively used to boost operational efficiency and to sharpen the blade of commercial and political propaganda, such as social media algorithms which decide what content to present each viewer so as to keep them on the platform for as long as possible.  

As humans have always understood it, intelligence and learning are inseparably linked to being aware or conscious, and fancy computations and calculations of 0’s and 1’s do not constitute anything even remotely close to the complexity of biological awareness, much less the human consciousness. Again, the relationship between our physical universe and the human mind still represents one of the great mysteries of the universe, but with new tools and techniques at their disposal, generation after generation of tinkerers makes renewed attempts at assembling some new form of artificial intelligence; a clay golem, a Frankenstein, which as we all know takes on a perturbed life of it’s own beyond the maker’s imagination and original intention.  

In the human social realm, a particular individual’s character—something by its very nature immaterial, nebulous, and more a way of being than a material “thing”—cannot be understood by studying individual parts, in this case cells, atoms, or even more complex physical features like height or skin tone. Contrary to this belief, in the name of 19th century science anthropological criminologists gathered data by measuring craniums, noses, and other physical attributes in order to correlate certain attributes with, for example, intelligence and increased likelihood of devious anti-social behavior. With seemingly objective scientific data in hand, we had empirical evidence and, hence, rational reason to collectively target, suppress, and exclude “inferior” individuals, races, and minorities. Most of us are well aware of, and indeed should never forget the hideous consequences of this philosophy as it culminated in the holocaust of Jews, gypsies, and other minorities in the 20th century. In a similar, albeit much more subtle fashion, today’s data scientists collect and process data with surgical precision in order to target and manipulate the public with propaganda and to calculate whether we are worthy of loans, parole from incarceration, medical treatments, and important matters in many other critical areas of life.  

Much like an individual’s character is to the physical human body and its cells, the mysteries of our collective social and political character cannot be unlocked by breaking down observable, empirical elements into smaller parts or gathering and processing more data. Nonetheless, in the confusing eschatology of our techno-scientific religion, the final atonement consists of two interrelated event horizons only seriously contemplated by faithful futurologists and in the entertaining anecdotes of science fiction.  

The technocratic clergy envision a near-future in which technical solutions will enable us “cure the disease of death” and shed our mortal coil to conquer immortality, thereby elevating ourselves to the status of gods. The clergy’s suggested paths towards human immortality rely on combinations of advances in biological organ harvesting (e.g., growing clone body parts to serve as replacements), fusion of the human body with machine parts (e.g., human cyborgs with technological implants), or uploading the human mind into the digital realm for replication and permanent safekeeping. In the latter case of total digitalization of a biological being, the claim that a human personality can be uploaded to a machine is based on the assumption that electrical, digital avatars are the same as the organic biological person on every perceivable level and for all intents and purposes. In other words, the endeavor assumes that human character—the sum of the parts of trillions of cells and human experiences—can be fully observed, broken down, and at the smallest level, translated via digitization into 0’s and 1’s, or whatever unforeseeable new units of measurement scientists come up with.  

Though clearly less desirable, there is also real potential that continued technological development will lead to what is known as “the singularity,” in which artificial intelligence as the mind and robotics as the body combine to form a new, technically superior, conscious-like being, representing an event horizon after which point humans would cede control to our new machine masters—that is, the total and absolute submission of humans to machines, or eventually even the extinction of humans with machines spreading across the universe as our distant descendants. In popular culture, these hypothetical futures have been frequently contemplated in science fiction films like Terminator and The Matrix. Whoever or whatever becomes the apex species to reign above all the lower life forms and the material world, we can only hope that it keeps alive a grain of our seemingly invisible, qualitative aspects of humanity.  

Despite the potentially grim prospects of continued technological advances and the fundamental differences between electronic computing and biological consciousness, humanity is enchanted by techno-scientific spells more than ever before. To the extent that leaders and the general public remain technologically and spiritually illiterate, we find it hard to challenge the bold claims made by the techno-scientific clergy, especially as they present us with an endless slew of new discoveries, promises, and dazzling inventions that indeed work marvelously well on command.  

Are today’s scientists and technologists completely unaware of the fables about the clay golem, Frankenstein, the Fountain of Youth, and the Tower of Babel? Have we all forgotten the doomed endeavors of Spanish explorers that ran their crews and expeditions into oblivion in search of immortality?  
